Add guide on node failure analysis (#405)
gardener/documentation: website/documentation/guides/monitoring_and_troubleshooting/analysing-node-failures/_index.md

---
title: Analyzing Node Removal and Failures
description: "Utilize Gardeners Monitoring and Logging to analyze removal and failures of nodes."
level: intermediate
category: Debugging
scope: operator
---

## Overview
Sometimes operators want to find out why a certain node got removed. This guide helps to identify possible causes.
There are a few potential reasons why nodes can be removed:
- [broken node](#find-out-whether-the-node-was-unhealthy): a node becomes unhealthy and machine-controller-manager terminates it in an attempt to replace the unhealthy node with a new one
- [scale-down](#scale-down): cluster-autoscaler sees that a node is under-utilized and therefore scales down a worker pool

> - node rolling](#node-rolling): configuration changes to a worker pool (or cluster) like changing the K8s/OS version, changing the root disks or changing machine types require all nodes of one or all worker pools to be rolled and thus all nodes to be replaced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [node rolling](#node-rolling): configuration changes to a worker pool (or cluster) require all nodes of one or all worker pools to be rolled and thus all nodes to be replaced. Some possible changes are: 
  - the K8s/OS version
  - the root disks
  - changing machine types 
```

> See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/logging.md for how to utilize the logging information in Gardener.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Helpful information can be obtained using the logging stack. See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/logging.md for how to utilize the logging information in Gardener.
```

## Find out whether the Node was `unhealthy`
### Check the Node Events
A good first indication on what happened to a node can be obtained from the node's events. Events are scraped and ingested into the logging system, so they can be found in the explore tab of Grafana (make sure to select `loki` as datasource) with a query like `{job="event-logging"} | unpack | object="Node/<node-name>"` or find any event mentioning the node in question via a broader query like `{job="event-logging"}|="<node-name>"`

A potential result might reveal
```
{"_entry":"Node ip-10-55-138-185.eu-central-1.compute.internal status is now: NodeNotReady","count":1,"firstTimestamp":"2023-04-05T12:02:08Z","lastTimestamp":"2023-04-05T12:02:08Z","namespace":"default","object":"Node/ip-10-55-138-185.eu-central-1.compute.internal","origin":"shoot","reason":"NodeNotReady","source":"node-controller","type":"Normal"}
```

### Check machine-controller-manager Logs

> If a node was getting unhealthy, the last conditions can be found in the logs of the machine-controller-manager by using a query like `{pod_name=~"machine-controller-manager.*"}|="<node-name>"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a node was getting unhealthy, the last conditions can be found in the logs of the ´machine-controller-manager` by using a query like `{pod_name=~"machine-controller-manager.*"}|="<node-name>"`.
```

```
This reveals that `node` `ip-10-55-138-185.eu-central-1.compute.internal` is backed by `machine` `shoot--demo--cluster-pool-z1-6dffc-jh4z4`. On infrastructures other than AWS you can omit this step.

With the machine name at hand, now search for log entries with `{pod_name=~"machine-controller-manager.*"}|="<machine-name>"`.
In case the node had failing conditions, you'd find logs like this:
```
2023-04-05 12:02:08	{"log":"Machine shoot--demo--cluster-pool-z1-6dffc-jh4z4 is unhealthy - changing MachineState to Unknown. Node conditions: [{Type:ClusterNetworkProblem Status:False LastHeartbeatTime:2023-04-05 11:58:39 +0000 UTC LastTransitionTime:2023-03-23 11:59:29 +0000 UTC Reason:NoNetworkProblems Message:no cluster network problems} ... {Type:Ready Status:Unknown LastHeartbeatTime:2023-04-05 11:55:27 +0000 UTC LastTransitionTime:2023-04-05 12:02:07 +0000 UTC Reason:NodeStatusUnknown Message:Kubelet stopped posting node status.}]","pid":"1","severity":"WARN","source":"machine_util.go:637"}
```

> In the example above, the reason for an unhealthy node was that kubelet failed to renew its heartbeat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, the reason for an unhealthy node was that `kubelet` failed to renew its heartbeat.
```

> Whatever the failure condition might have been, if a node gets unhealthy, it will be terminated by machine-controller-manager after `machineHealthTimeout` has elapsed (this can be configured in your [shoot spec](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.68.0/example/90-shoot.yaml#L132))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whatever the failure condition might have been, if a node gets unhealthy, it will be terminated by `machine-controller-manager` after the `machineHealthTimeout` has elapsed (this parameter can be configured in your [shoot spec](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.68.0/example/90-shoot.yaml#L132))
```

### Check the Node Logs

> Node kernel logs, kubelet logs and a few others are scraped and can be queried with this query `{nodename="<node-name>"}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each `node` the kernel and `kubelet` logs as well as a few others are scraped and can be queried with this query `{nodename="<node-name>"}`
```

This might reveal OS specific issues or in the absence of any logs (e.g. after the node went unhealthy) might indicate a network disruption.
Infrastructure provides might be able to provide more information on particular VM failures in such cases.

### Check the Network Problem Detector Dashboard
If your Gardener installation utilizes https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-shoot-networking-problemdetector, you can check the dashboard named "Network Problem Detector" in Grafana for hints on network issues on the node of interest.

## Scale-Down 

> In general scale-downs are managed by the [cluster-autoscaler](https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler), its logs can be found with the query `{container_name="cluster-autoscaler"}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, scale-downs are managed by the [cluster-autoscaler](https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler), its logs can be found with the query `{container_name="cluster-autoscaler"}`.
```

Attempts to remove a node can be found with the query `{container_name="cluster-autoscaler"}|="Scale-down: removing empty node"`

> If a scale-down has caused disruptions in your workload, consider protecting your workload by adding PodDisruptionBudgets (see https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler/blob/master/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md#what-types-of-pods-can-prevent-ca-from-removing-a-node for more options)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a scale-down has caused disruptions in your workload, consider protecting your workload by adding `PodDisruptionBudgets` (see https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler/blob/master/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md#what-types-of-pods-can-prevent-ca-from-removing-a-node for more options).
```

---
title: Analyzing Node Removal and Failures

> description: "Utilize Gardeners Monitoring and Logging to analyze removal and failures of nodes."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "Utilize Gardener's Monitoring and Logging to analyze removal and failures of nodes"
```

level: intermediate
category: Debugging
scope: operator
---

## Overview
Sometimes operators want to find out why a certain node got removed. This guide helps to identify possible causes.
There are a few potential reasons why nodes can be removed:
- [broken node](#find-out-whether-the-node-was-unhealthy): a node becomes unhealthy and machine-controller-manager terminates it in an attempt to replace the unhealthy node with a new one
- [scale-down](#scale-down): cluster-autoscaler sees that a node is under-utilized and therefore scales down a worker pool
- [node rolling](#node-rolling): configuration changes to a worker pool (or cluster) require all nodes of one or all worker pools to be rolled and thus all nodes to be replaced. Some possible changes are: 
  - the K8s/OS version
  - changing machine types

> Helpful information can be obtained using the logging stack. See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/logging.md for how to utilize the logging information in Gardener.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Helpful information can be obtained by using the logging stack. See [Logging Stack](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/logging.md) for how to utilize the logging information in Gardener.
```

> ## Find out whether the Node was `unhealthy`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Find Out Whether the Node Was `unhealthy`
```

### Check the Node Events

> A good first indication on what happened to a node can be obtained from the node's events. Events are scraped and ingested into the logging system, so they can be found in the explore tab of Grafana (make sure to select `loki` as datasource) with a query like `{job="event-logging"} | unpack | object="Node/<node-name>"` or find any event mentioning the node in question via a broader query like `{job="event-logging"}|="<node-name>"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A good first indication on what happened to a node can be obtained from the node's events. Events are scraped and ingested into the logging system, so they can be found in the explore tab of Grafana (make sure to select `loki` as datasource) with a query like `{job="event-logging"} | unpack | object="Node/<node-name>"` or find any event mentioning the node in question via a broader query like `{job="event-logging"}|="<node-name>"`.
```

```
This reveals that `node` `ip-10-55-138-185.eu-central-1.compute.internal` is backed by `machine` `shoot--demo--cluster-pool-z1-6dffc-jh4z4`. On infrastructures other than AWS you can omit this step.

With the machine name at hand, now search for log entries with `{pod_name=~"machine-controller-manager.*"}|="<machine-name>"`.
In case the node had failing conditions, you'd find logs like this:
```
2023-04-05 12:02:08	{"log":"Machine shoot--demo--cluster-pool-z1-6dffc-jh4z4 is unhealthy - changing MachineState to Unknown. Node conditions: [{Type:ClusterNetworkProblem Status:False LastHeartbeatTime:2023-04-05 11:58:39 +0000 UTC LastTransitionTime:2023-03-23 11:59:29 +0000 UTC Reason:NoNetworkProblems Message:no cluster network problems} ... {Type:Ready Status:Unknown LastHeartbeatTime:2023-04-05 11:55:27 +0000 UTC LastTransitionTime:2023-04-05 12:02:07 +0000 UTC Reason:NodeStatusUnknown Message:Kubelet stopped posting node status.}]","pid":"1","severity":"WARN","source":"machine_util.go:637"}
```

In the example above, the reason for an unhealthy node was that `kubelet` failed to renew its heartbeat.

> Whatever the failure condition might have been, if a node gets unhealthy, it will be terminated by `machine-controller-manager` after the `machineHealthTimeout` has elapsed (this parameter can be configured in your [shoot spec](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.68.0/example/90-shoot.yaml#L132))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whatever the failure condition might have been, if a node gets unhealthy, it will be terminated by `machine-controller-manager` after the `machineHealthTimeout` has elapsed (this parameter can be configured in your [shoot spec](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/v1.68.0/example/90-shoot.yaml#L132)).
```

### Check the Node Logs

> For each `node` the kernel and `kubelet` logs as well as a few others are scraped and can be queried with this query `{nodename="<node-name>"}`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each `node` the kernel and `kubelet` logs, as well as a few others, are scraped and can be queried with this query `{nodename="<node-name>"}`
```

> This might reveal OS specific issues or in the absence of any logs (e.g. after the node went unhealthy) might indicate a network disruption.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This might reveal OS specific issues or in the absence of any logs (e.g., after the node went unhealthy) might indicate a network disruption.
```

Infrastructure provides might be able to provide more information on particular VM failures in such cases.

### Check the Network Problem Detector Dashboard

> If your Gardener installation utilizes https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-shoot-networking-problemdetector, you can check the dashboard named "Network Problem Detector" in Grafana for hints on network issues on the node of interest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your Gardener installation utilizes [
gardener-extension-shoot-networking-problemdetector](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-shoot-networking-problemdetector), you can check the dashboard named "Network Problem Detector" in Grafana for hints on network issues on the node of interest.
```

Author: Is that really required? For our internal doc tooling? I see that github and actually all local md tools I used so far render strings starting with `http://` or `https://` always as links without the need for square/round brackets.

Reviewer 2: This change is aimed to improve the readability of the information - it looks better as a clickable link than as a url.

Author: Hmm, I thought you suggested yesterday to just put brackets without adding a custom link name, like [https://...](https://...), ok, so your argument is the custom link text, sure, why not (although I wouldn't agree that it necessarily improves readability, often I want to convey the information e.g. where a certain project is located (e.g. on public github, part of the Gardener org) without the user clicking or hovering the link) but I don't mind changing it.

## Scale-Down 
In general, scale-downs are managed by the [cluster-autoscaler](https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler), its logs can be found with the query `{container_name="cluster-autoscaler"}`.
Attempts to remove a node can be found with the query `{container_name="cluster-autoscaler"}|="Scale-down: removing empty node"`

> If a scale-down has caused disruptions in your workload, consider protecting your workload by adding `PodDisruptionBudgets` (see https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler/blob/master/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md#what-types-of-pods-can-prevent-ca-from-removing-a-node for more options).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a scale-down has caused disruptions in your workload, consider protecting your workload by adding `PodDisruptionBudgets` (the [FAQ](https://github.com/gardener/autoscaler/blob/master/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md#what-types-of-pods-can-prevent-ca-from-removing-a-node) provides more options).
```

## Node Rolling

> Node rolling can be caused by e.g.:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Node rolling can be caused by ,e.g.:
```
